posts/2014-12-05 Checking concurrent programs with symbolic simulations.md, before:

Concurrent programs with inputs/outputs are hard to test: they are non-deterministic and interact with the outside world. They are even harder to formally specify completely, and prove correct. We present (what we believe to be) a novel approach to check such programs doing symbolic simulations in [Coq](https://coq.inria.fr/).

Symbolic simulations are like deterministic simulations one concrete data, using some symbolic values to actually run and check the results of a *full set* of simulations. Here is a good talk about testing real systems by simulation: [Testing Distributed Systems with Deterministic Simulation](https://foundationdb.com/videos/testing-distributed-systems-with-deterministic-simulation). We use the Coq's pure programming language Gallina to describe the behavior off a program's environment, which can include the user, the operating system, other connected computers, ... The environment is responsible for two things:

* feeding data to the program
* checking that its answers verify some properties

We hope this approach will provide a good compromise between testing on single data instances and full specifications. We will present here how we simulate two kinds of concurrent calculus with some small examples.

## Calculus with handlers
To allow simpler reasoning, an important property we want for our calculus is to be somehow "deterministic". By removing shared mutable variables we remove all sources of non-determinism, except the order of input events. However having shared mutable states is often useful, typically to implement a data storage. Still, we will try to go as far as possible without mutable state.

An other way to reduce non-determinism is to restrict the way you are waiting for events and doing threads. We take a first simple example with only asynchronous calls and forks (without joins).

    dfsd

### Run
### Examples

## Calculus with binds
Definition.
### Run
### Examples

## Future work

Commit message:

Definition of the simple calculus

posts/2014-12-05 Checking concurrent programs with symbolic simulations.md, after:

Concurrent programs with inputs/outputs are hard to test: they are non-deterministic and interact with the outside world. They are even harder to formally specify completely, and prove correct. We present (what we believe to be) a novel approach to check such programs doing symbolic simulations in [Coq](https://coq.inria.fr/).

Symbolic simulations are like deterministic simulations one concrete data, using some symbolic values to actually run and check the results of a *full set* of simulations. Here is a good talk about testing real systems by simulation: [Testing Distributed Systems with Deterministic Simulation](https://foundationdb.com/videos/testing-distributed-systems-with-deterministic-simulation). We use the Coq's pure programming language Gallina to describe the behavior of a program's environment, which can include the user, the operating system, other connected computers, ... The environment is responsible for two things:

* feeding data to the program
* checking that its answers verify some properties

We hope this approach will provide a good compromise between full specifications and testing on single data instances. We will define a simple concurrent calculus and give some small examples.

## Calculus with handlers
To allow simpler reasoning, we want our calculus to be somehow "deterministic". By removing shared mutable variables we remove all the sources of non-determinism, except the order of the input events. However, having shared mutable states is often useful, typically to implement a data storage. Still, we will try to go as far as possible without mutable state.

An other way to reduce non-determinism is to restrict the way we are waiting for events and doing threads. We define a calculus with only asynchronous calls and forks (without joins):

    Inductive t : Type :=
    | Ret : t
    | Par : t -> t -> t
    | Send : forall (command : Command.t), Command.request command ->
      (Command.answer command -> t) -> t.

A computation can be:

* `Ret`: does nothing
* `Par c1 c2`: starts `c1` and `c2` in parallel
* `Send command request (fun answer => c)`: emits a request `request` of kind `command` with a handler for the answer

## Simulations

## Examples

## Future work
